IMMIGRATION, DEATH PENALTY
REFORMS, VOTING RIGHTS, AND
MORE, IN AN EXCLUSIVE INTERVIEW
WITH ATTORNEY GENERAL ERIC
HOLDER.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD THIS THURSDAY, THE
U.N.'S TOP HUMAN RIGHTS CHIEF
ACCUSES BOTH ISRAEL AND HAMAS OF
WAR CRIMES.
>> Ifill: PLUS, A COLORADO TOWN
RESURRECTS ITS BLUEGRASS
FESTIVAL AFTER DEVASTATING
FLOODS THREATENED ITS VERY
EXISTENCE.
>> THERE WAS A LOT OF DOUBT THAT
THE FESTIVAL WAS GOING TO HAPPEN
AT ALL.
IT WAS A REALLY IMPORTANT HERE
TO COME BACK AND DO SOMETHING.
>> TO BE PART OF THIS INCREDIBLE
COMMUNITY THAT HAS AGAINST ALL
ODDS HAS FOUND A WAY TO RECLAIM
THIS LAND AND TURN IT INTO THE
FESTIVAL SITE THAT IT ONCE WAS.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
SET TO START FRIDAY.
ALL PARTIES HAVE AGREED TO IT.
THIS COMES AFTER 23 DAYS OF
FIGHTING.
THE DEATH TOLL ON EACH SIDE NOW
SURPASSING THE LAST GAZA
CONFLICT FIVE YEARS AGO.
1,422 P
1,422 PALESTINIANS AND 59
ISRAELIS, MOST OF THEM SOLDIERS,
HAVE BEEN KILLED IN THIS MONTH'S
FIGHTING.
WE LOOK AT THE EVENTS OF THE
DAY.
PLUMES OF SMOKE MINGLED WITH
SUNRISE ABOVE GAZA CITY.
MOSQUES WERE ONCE AGAIN A
TARGET.
REMNANTS OF ONE STOOD AMID ITS
OWN RUBBLE FOLLOWING AN ISRAELI
AIRSTRIKE.
ELSEWHERE, FIREFIGHTERS DOUSED
FLAMES AFTER ANOTHER STRIKE
REDUCED HOMES TO A DEBRIS-FILLED
CRATER.
AND IN NORTHERN GAZA, 30 PEOPLE,
MOSTLY CHILDREN, WERE EVACUATED
FROM A UNITED NATIONS SCHOOL
AFTER ISRAELI TANK SHELLS LANDED
NEARBY.
THIS, A DAY AFTER9 OPLEPE DIED
WHEN ISRAELI SHELLS STRUCK A
SIMILAR SCHOOL SHELTERING MORE
THAN 3 THOUSAND PALESTINIAN
REFUGEES.
BUT WARNING SIRENS ALSO BLAREDL.
THE ISRAELI MILITARY SAID MORE
THAN 60 ROCKETS WERE FIRED AT
ISRAEL FROM WITHIN GAZA TODAY,
ONLY MODERATE INJURIES WERE
REPORTED.
THREE-AND-A-HALF WEEKS INTO THIS
LATEST ISRAEL-GAZA WAR, THE U.N.
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSIONER NAVI
PILLAY ACCUSED BOTH ISRAEL AND
HAMAS OF COMMITTING WAR CRIMES,
BUT RESERVED HER HARSHEST WORDS
FOR ISRAEL.
>> THE SHELLING OF HOUSES
DIRECTLY MEANS A VIOLATION OF
ISRAEL'S OBLIGATION TO PROTECT
THE RIGHT TO HOUSING, RIGHT TO
FOOD, RIGHT TO CLEAN WATER OF
GAZANS, EVEN AS, UNDER ITS
OBLIGATION AS AN OCCUPYING
FORCE.
AND THEREFORE I WOULD SAY THAT
THEY APPEAR TO BE DEFYING,
DELIBERATE DEFIANCE OF
OBLIGATIONS THAT INTERNATIONAL
LAW IMPOSES ON ISRAEL.
>> Woodruff: MEANWHILE IN
WASHINGTON, THE WHITE HOUSE
PRESS SECRETARY, WHILE DEFENDING
ISRAEL, SAID IT NEEDS TO DO MORE
TO PROTECT CIVILIANS.
>> BUT THE SHELLING OF A U.N.
FACILITY THAT IS HOUSING
INNOCENT CIVILIANS WHO ARE
FLEEING VIOLENCE IS TOTALLY
UNACCEPTABLE.
AND TOTALLY INDEFENSIBLE.
>> Woodruff: BUT ISRAELI PRIME
MINISTER BENJAMIN NETANYAHU
BRUSHED ASIDE SUCH COMMENTS
AFTER A SECURITY CABINET
MEETING.
>> ( translated ): SO FAR WE
NEUTRALIZED SCORES OF TERROR
TUNNELS AND WE ARE DETERMINED TO
COMPLETE THIS MISSION WITH OR
WITHOUT A CEASE-FIRE.
THEREFORE, I WON'T AGREE TO ANY
PROPOSAL THAT WILL NOT ENABLE
THE ISRAELI MILITARY TO FINISH
THIS IMPORTANT TASK.
>> Woodruff: TO SUPPLEMENT THE
ONGOING CAMPAIGN, THE ISRAELI
MILITARY TODAY CALLED UP ANOTHER
16,000 RESERVIST FORCES.
IT ALSO RELEASED TWO VIDEOS.
THE FIRST, IT CLAIMED SHOWED
MILITANT ROCKETS BEING LAUNCHED
FROM POPULATED AREAS OF GAZA
TOWARDS ISRAEL.
THE OTHER, FOOTAGE OF A TUNNEL
ENTRANCE AND WEAPONS PURPORTEDLY
DISCOVERED IN A GAZA STRIP
MOSQUE BY ISRAELI DEFENSE
FORCES.
NARRATION CLAIMS I.D.F.
PERSONNEL FOUGHT WITH FIVE
MILITANTS AT THE SITE.
>> Ifill: A TEAM OF
INVESTIGATORS FINALLY REACHED
MALAYSIAN AIRLINES CRASH SITE
TODAY.
FIGHTING WAS CEASED FOR A DAY TO
THEY COULD GET THROUGH.
THE EXPERTS WERE ESCORTED BY
ARMED TROOPS AND ARMORED
VEHICLES.
ONE OF THEIR TASKS IS TO BRING
BACK VICTIMS REMAINS AND
PERSONAL BELONGINGS.
DOZENS OF BODIES HAVE YET TO BE
RETRIEVED.
THE HEAD OF THE EUROPEAN
MONITORING MISSION VOICED HOPE
HIS TEAM COULD RETURN REGULARLY.
>> WE SUCCEEDED TODAY GETTING
DNA SAMPLES FROM 25 VICTIMS.
WE NOW HAVE THE PERSONAL
BELONGINGS OF 27 VICTIMS IN OUR
POSITION.
THE BELONGINGS AND THE DNA
SAMPLES WERE IN THE MORTUARY IN
DONETSK AND HAVE BEEN HANDED
OVER TO THE DUTCH AND AUSTRALIAN
EXPERTS.
>> Ifill: ALL 298 PASSENGERS AND
CREW MEMBERS ABOARD THE FLIGHT
WERE KILLED WHEN A MISSILE
BROUGHT THE PLANE DOWN TWO WEEKS
AGO.
>> Woodruff: 729 PEOPLE IN WEST
AFRICA HAVE NOW DIED FROM THE
WORST EBOLA OUTBREAK ON RECORD.
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
ESTIMATES 57 OF THOSE DEATHS
HAPPENED OVER A THREE-DAY TIME
PERIOD LAST WEEK.
U.S. HEALTH OFFICIALS WARNED
AMERICANS NOT TO TRAVEL TO
GUINEA, LIBERIA AND SIERRA
LEONE.
AND TRAVELERS AROUND THE GLOBE
WERE UNDER NEW SCRUTINY.
IN CHINA, AIRPORTS BEGAN
SCREENING PASSENGERS BODY
TEMPERATURES USING THERMAL
SCANNERS.
>> Ifill: STOCKS PLUNGED ON WALL
STREET TODAY, AND ERASING NEARLY
ALL OF THIS MONTH'S GAINS.
IT WAS LARGELY ATTRIBUTED TO
JITTERS OVER EUROPE'S ECONOMIC
WOES AND A JUMP IN U.S. LABOR
COSTS.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
POSTED ITS FIRST MONTHLY DECLINE
SINCE JANUARY PLUMMETING 317
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 16,563; THE
NASDAQ FELL 93 POINTS TO CLOSE
AT 4,369; THE S&P 500 LOSTON 39
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 1930, POSTING
ITS WORST DAY SINCE APRIL.
>> Woodruff: ARGENTINA SLID INTO
ITS SECOND DEBT DEFAULT IN 13
YEARS TODAY.
THE COUNTRY FAILED TO REACH A
DEAL WITH BONDHOLDERS IN DOWN TO
THE WIRE EMERGENCY MEETINGS LAST
NIGHT IN NEW YORK.
THE HEDGE FUNDS WANT FULL
PAYMENT PLUS INTEREST TO THE
TUNE OF A BILLION-AND-A-HALF
DOLLARS.
THAT LEFT THE FUTURE OF THE
SOUTH AMERICAN NATION'S ECONOMY
IN QUESTION.
IT IS ALREADY IN A RECESSION,
HAS A SHORTAGE OF DOLLARS AND
HAS ONE OF THE HIGHEST INFLATION
RATES IN THE WORLD.
>> Ifill: THE DIRECTOR OF THE
C.I.A. HAS APOLOGIZED TO SENATE
LEADERS FOR HOW AGENCY EMPLOYEES
SEARCHED THEIR OFFICE COMPUTERS
EARLIER IN THE YEAR.
AN INTERNAL C.I.A. INVESTIGATION
FOUND OFFICERS IMPROPERLY
ACCESSED A CLASSIFIED COMPUTER
NETWORK AS THEY PREPARED A
REPORT ON THE C.I.A.'S
INTERROGATION PROGRAM.
AGENCY DIRECTOR JOHN BRENNAN
SAID HE'S CONVENED AN
ACCOUNTABILITY BOARD TO LOOK
INTO THE MATTER.
>> Woodruff: CONGRESS RACED
TOWARDS A SHIFTING FINISH LINE
IT ITS EFFORT TO GET OUT OF TOWN
FOR AN AUGUST RECESS.
THE HOUSE REJECTED THE SENATE'S
$8.1 BILLION MEASURE TO FUND
TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS THROUGH
THE END OF THE YEAR.
INSTEAD, REPRESENTATIVES SENT
THEIR OWN $10.9 BILLION PLAN
BACK TO THE SENATE.
AND AN IMMIGRATION BILL IN THE
HOUSE FALTERED, FORCING
REPUBLICANS TO REGROUP AND CALL
CONGRESSMEN BACK TO WORK
TOMORROW.
WE'LL HAVE MUCH MORE ON HOW THE
BORDER FUNDING BILL UNRAVELED IN
THE PROGRAM.
>> Ifill: THE WISCONSIN SUPREME
COURT UPHELD TWO CONTROVERSIAL
STATE LAWS TODAY.
IT RULED A REPUBLICAN PASSED LAW
REQUIRING PHOTO IDENTIFICATION
AT THE POLLS IS LEGAL, EVEN
THOUGH THAT LAW IS CURRENTLY
BLOCKED IN FEDERAL COURT.
AND IT UPHELD THE 2011 LAW THAT
EFFECTIVELY ENDED COLLECTIVE
BARGAINING FOR PUBLIC WORKERS.
THAT LAW LED TO A RECALL
ELECTION FOR REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR
SCOTT WALKER AND SPARKED MASSIVE
PROTESTS.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE NEWSHOUR.
ATTORNEY GENERAL ERIC HOLDER ON
IMMIGRATION, THE DEATH PENALTY
AND VOTER I.D. LAWS.
A DIVIDED CONGRESS STRUGGLES TO
ADDRESS THE BORDER CRISIS.
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES PUSH
BACK ON LEGISLATION TO COMBAT
SEXUAL ASSUALTS ON CAMPUS.
ARE ISRAEL AND HAMAS ABIDING BY
THE LAWS OF WAR?
AND A COLORADO TOWN PICKS ITSELF
UP AFTER A FLOOD, BY PLAYING
BLUEGRASS.
>> Ifill: FROM VOTING RIGHTS TO
BORDER CONTROL TO THE DEATH
PENALTY.
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE HOLDS
THE REINS ON ANY NUMBER OF
CRITICAL ISSUES CENTRAL TO THE
NATIONAL DEBATE.
I SAT DOWN WITH ATTORNEY GENERAL
ERIC HOLDER THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT TODAY TO TALK ABOUT
SOME OF THEM.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US,
MR. ATTORNEY GENERAL.
AS THE NATION'S CHIEF LAW
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, YOU WATCHED
YESTERDAY AS THE HOUSE VOTED TO
GIVE THE SPEAKER THE RIGHT TO
SUE THE PRESIDENT.
WHAT WERE YOU THINKING WHEN YOU
SAW THAT HAPPEN?
>> WELL, I THOUGHT I WAS
WITNESSING SOMETHING THAT WAS
MORE POLITICAL THAN LEGAL.
THERE'S NOT MUCH TO THAT
LAWSUIT.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT I WOULD
BE SURPRISED IF A COURT FINDS
THAT THERE IS STANDING, AND I
CERTAINLY DON'T EXPECT THAT, AT
THE END OF THE DAY, THE
PLAINTIFFS WILL WIN THAT CASE,
AND I THINK IT'S VERY KIND OF
UNFORTUNATE.
THE PRESIDENT HAS INDICATED A
WILLINGNESS TO WORK WITH
CONGRESS, BUT HE'S ALSO
INDICATED CONGRESS WILL NOT ACT
AND THEY'VE NOT ACTED AT
HISTORIC LEVELS, AND HE HAS TO
DO THE WORK OF THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE, AND, SO, HE'S DONE
THINGS THAT ARE NECESSARY, THAT
ARE LEGAL, AND THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE WANT TO SEE DONE.
>> Woodruff: AT THE SAME TIME
AS THE HOUSE HAS BEEN CHASTISING
THE PRESIDENT FOR OVERREACHING,
TODAY THEY'RE HAVING SOME
TROUBLE COMING UP WITH, AS WE
SPEAK, A VOTE ON THE BORDER
CRISIS, ON THE MIGRANT ISSUES.
THE QUESTION I GUESS I HAVE FOR
YOU IS THE SPEAKER SAID THERE'S
NO MORE THE PRESIDENT CAN DO.
IS THERE MORE THE PRESIDENT CAN
DO?
>> WELL, THERE'S MORE THE
PRESIDENT CAN DO BUT THERE'S
NOTHING WE CAN DO IN THE
EXECUTIVE BRANCH BUT THERE'S A
FUNDAMENTAL LEAD FOR US TO HAVE
THE FUNDS TO DO THESE KINDS OF
THINGS.
I WANT TO SURGE IMMIGRATION
JUDGES TO THE BORDER, HAVE MORE
IMMIGRATION JUDGES AT THE BORDER
TO PROCESS THESE KINDS OF CASES
BUT THAT REQUIRES MONEY.
WE ESTIMATED IT WOULD TAKE
$3.7 BILLION, THE SENATE SEEMED
TO BE MOVING AROUND THE
$3 BILLION MARK.
THE HOUSE WAS HAVING PROBLEMS
COMING UP WITH $600 MILLION.
THESE THINGS COST MONEY AND AT
SOME POINT WE HAVE TO MAKE
DECISIONS ABWHAT'S IN OUR
NATIONAL INTEREST.
THE PRESIDENT HAS MADE THE
DETERMINATION, HAS BEEN DEALING
WITH THE SITUATION ON THE BORED,
IT IS OF NATIONAL CONSEQUENCE
AND, THEREFORE, SHOULD INVOLVE A
NATIONAL RESPONSE AND THAT
INVOLVES SPENDING MONEY.
>> Woodruff: THIS HAS BEEN A
PROBLEM SINCE AT LEAST 2006 WHEN
ATTORNEY GENERAL GONZALEZ WAS
HERE.
WHY HAS IT TAKEN SO LONG?YS BEE?
>> IT'S NOT ALWAYS THAT.
WE SEED NOR MONEY TO HIRE MORE
JUDGES AND WE HAVE INCREASED THE
NUMBER OF JUDGES THAT WE HAVE,
BUT THE BACKLOG THAT WE HAVE IS
UNACCEPTABLY HIGH.
WE NEED MORE RESOURCES.
WE NEED TO BE ABLE TO TRAIN MORE
JUDGES, SO THAT'S SOMETHING
WE'RE WORKING ON, BUT WE NEED
THE SUPPORT OF CONGRESS TO GET
TO THE PLACE WE ULTIMATELY WANT
TO BE.
>> Woodruff: ASSUMING CONGRESS
DOESN'T GIVE YOU THE MONEY YOU
ASKED FOR, HOW WOULD YOU
RI NEEDS?
IS IT BORDER SECURITY,
IMMIGRATION JUDGES YOU ASKED FOR
OR SOMETHING ELSE, SHI
DEAL WITH THE NEEDS OF ALL THESE
CHILDREN WHO ARE CROSSING THE
RIO GRANDE COMING FROM HONDURAS,
GUATEMALA, EL SALVADOR?
>> WELL, IF WE DON'T GET THE
CONGRESSIONAL SUPPORT NEEDED,
WE'LL DO THE BEST WE CAN, WE'LL
SCRAMBLE AND GET IMMIGRATION
JUDGES THERE IN SOME FORM OR
FASHION.
WE'LL PROBABLY HAVE TO USE
TECHNOLOGY, TELEVISION TO HAVE
JUDGES IN REMOTE LOCATIONS.
WE'LL CERTAINLY MAKE SURE BORDER
SECURITY IS ASSURED AND MAKE
SURE ALSO THAT WHOEVER IS
CROSSING THE BORDER IS TREATED
IN A FAIR AND HUMANITARIAN WAY.
WE'LL DO THAT WITH THE RESOURCES
THAT WE HAVE, BUT THE REALITY IS
THAT WE CAN CERTAINLY DO A MUCH
BETTER JOB AND DO THE JOB THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE EXPECT IF WE HAD
THE RESOURCES THAT WE HAVE
REQUESTED.
>> Woodruff: YESTERDAY, YOU
EXPRESSED YOUR INTENT TO SPEAK
ON BEHALF OF PLAINTIFFS IN THE
WISCONSIN VOTER I.D. CASE AND IN
OHIO AS WELL.
TODAY THE WISCONSIN SUPREME
COURT UPHELD THAT LAW AND SAID
IT IS CONSTITUTIONAL.
WHAT ROLE CAN OR SHOULD THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAVE OF THAT
AT THIS POINT?
>> WELL, THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
HAS A UNIQUE ROLE IN MAKING SURE
THAT EVERY CITIZEN HAS THE RIGHT
TO EXERCISE THAT MOST
FUNDAMENTAL OF AMERICAN RIGHTS,
THE RIGHT TO VOTE.
THE '65 VOTING RIGHTS ACT IS
SOMETHING WE ALL HOLD DEAR,
GUTTED BY THE SHELL BY COUNTY
DECISION BUT LEFT CERTAIN PARTS
OF THE VOTING RIGHTS IN PLACE.
WE USED SECTION 2 WHERE A
FEDERAL JUDGE MADE THE CLAIMS
WERE VALID AND COULD NOT FIND AN
INSTANCE WHERE THE STATE COULD
SHOW AN INSTANCE OF BORDER FRAUD
WHICH WAS KIND OF THE
UNDERPINNINGS OF THE LAWSUIT, OF
THE DEFENSE TO THE LAWSUIT IN
WISCONSIN.
SO WE'RE GOING TO USE SECTION 2
AS WE HAVE IN OTHER STATES, IN
NORTH CAROLINA, IN XAS, WE'LL
USE IT IN WISCONSIN, WE'LL
SUPPORT THE SUITS IN WISCONSIN
AND OHIO AS WELL.
>> Woodruff: SO THIS IS GOING
BEYOND FILINGRTIEFS?
>> WELL, AT THIS POINT, I GUESS
WITH REGARD TO WHAT WE'VE DONE
IN WISCONSIN AND OHIO, WE'RE
JUST FILING BRIEFS.
CASES HAVE ALREADY BEEN FILED
BUT WE ARE USING SECTION 2 IN
OTHER PLACES IN NORTH CAROLINA
AND TEXAS.
THOSE CASES HAVE BEEN FILED AND
ARE TO BE ADJUDICATED.
>> Woodruff: LET ME ASK YOU
ABOUT SOMETHING ELSE.
SO MUCH HAPPENING THIS WEEK, BUT
IN THIS CASE, YOU HAVE BEEN
TASKED WITH COMING UP WITH THE
DEATH PENALTY REVIEW.
WE'VE WATCHED THE SERIES OF
BOTCHED EXECUTIONS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY BECAUSE OF USE OF A
COCKTAIL OF DRUGS AND THERE'S A
LOT OF DEBATE ABOUT WHY.
BUT THE QUESTION IS WHETHER THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS THE ROLE
TO INTERVENE IN WHAT BASICALLY
IS A STATE ROLE.
>> WELL, WE ARE CERTAINLY
LOOKING AT OUR OWN PROTOCOL.
THERE'S NOT BEEN A FEDERAL
EXECUTION IN A WHILE, THERE'S
BEEN A MORATORIUM.
AND WE'RE LOOKING AT THE
PROTOCOL, THE COCKTAIL, THE
DRUGS TO BE USED IF THERE WERE A
FEDERAL EXECUTION.
BUT I'M GREATLY TROUBLED BY WHAT
HAPPENED IN OKLAHOMA AND IN
ARIZONA, AND THERE MAY NOT BE A
LEGAL REQUIREMENT FOR
TRANSPARENCY AND TALKING ABOUT,
DESCRIBING THE DRUGS THAT ARE
USED, BUT YOU SOMETIMES HAVE TO
GO BEYOND THAT WHICH IS LEGALLY
REQUIRED TO DO SOMETHING THAT IS
RIGHT AND FOR THE STATE TO
EXERCISE THAT GREATEST OF ALL
POWERS, TO END A HUMAN LIFE, IT
SEEMS TO ME JUST ON A PERSONAL
LEVEL THAT TRANSPARENCY WOULD BE
A GOOD THING AND TO SHARE
INFORMATION ABOUT WHAT CHEMICALS
ARE USED, WHAT DRUGS ARE BEING
USED AND IT WOULD SEEM TO ME
THAT WOULD BE A BETTER WAY TO DO
THIS.
>> Woodruff: WHY ISN'T THERE A
WAY OF ENFORCING OR
STANDARDIZING IT?
>> I'M NOT SAYING THERE ISN'T.
I'M SAYING REGARDLESS OF WHETHER
THERE IS OR IS NOT -- I TAKE
NOTE OF THE FACT JUSTICE KENNEDY
MADE THE TERMS THE EXECUTION
COULD PROCEED IN SPITE OF THE
FACT A REQUEST WAS MADE FOR
INFORMATION ABOUT THE DRUGS THAT
WERE BEING USED.
SO IN SPITE OF, YOU KNOW,
WHETHER I AGREE OR DISAGREE WITH
JUDGE KENNEDY AND WHEREVER THE
COURTS MAY END UP, THERE IS AN
OBLIGATION, IT SEEMS TO ME, ON
THE PART OF THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH
CHARGED WITH THAT RESPONSIBILITY
TO BE FORTHCOMING ABOUT THE
MECHANISM, THE MEANS BY WHICH
THIS MOST SERIOUS OF EXECUTIVE
BRANCH ACTIONS CAN BE CARRIED
OUT.
>> Woodruff: WHERE DOES THE
DEATH PENALTY REVIEW YOU'VE
UNDERTAKEN STAND NOW?
>> IT'S UNDERWAY.
WE HAVE PEOPLE FROM THE CIVIL
RIGHTS DIVISION, CRIMINAL
DIVISION, VARIOUS OTHER
COMPONENTS WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT
LOOKING AT OUR PROTOCOL AND
TAKING INTO ACCOUNT WHAT WE HAVE
SEEN HAPPEN IN THE STATES
RECENTLY AS WE TRY TO WORK OUR
WAY THROUGH HOW THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT IS GOING TO IMPOSE
THE DEATH PENALTY.
>> Woodruff: JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT HAS HAD ITS PLUGS
ALONG THE WAY INCLUDING
FRIENDING WORK AT THE F.B.I.
WHICH HAS LED TO DUBIOUS
OUTCOMES FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE
SENTENCED.
HOW DO YOU HOLD STATES
ACCOUNTABLE WHEN THE FEDERAL GOT
HAS HAD ITS OWN PROBLEM BEING
HELD ACCOUNTABLE?
>> WE CERTAINLY ADMIT WHEN WE
HAVE MADE MISTAKES AND WHEN THAT
WAS IDE I HAVE HAD AS AN ISSUE,
THE PROBLEM WITH THE F.B.I. LAB,
WHAT I ORDERED WAS A REVIEW DONE
TO MAKE SURE THAT THE MISTAKES
COULD BE CORRECTED AND TO
IDENTIFY ALL PEOPLE WHO HAD BEEN
AFFECTED BY THOSE MISTAKES, MAKE
SURE THAT GOING FORWARD WE DON'T
MAKE THOSE KINDS OF MISTAKES
AGAIN.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS MADE
MISTAKES, BUT WHERE WE FIND THEM
WE ADMIT AND CORRECT THEM AND I
THINK SET AN EXAMPLE FOR THE
STATES.
THEY SHOULD MAKE THE SAME KIND
OF INQUIRY WHERE THEY HAVE BEEN
MADE MISTAKES AND CORRECT THEM
AS WELL AND WE HAVE SUPERVISORY
QUALIFICATIONS LOOKING INTO WHAT
THE STATES ARE DOING AND TO THE
EXTEND WE FIND STATES MAKING
MISTAKES WE'LL POINT THEM OUT
AND TRY TO WORK THROUGH THOSE
THINGS IN A RONALD TEAR WAY TO
THE EXTENT WE CAN AND IF WE
CAN'T WE USE THE POWER WE HAVE
TO BRING LAWSUITS.
>> Woodruff: SHOULD CITIZENS
THAT SUPPORT THE DEATH PENALTY
WORRY YOU'RE USING QUESTIONS
ABOUT ADMINISTRATION OF DRUGS
AND LETHAL INJECTIONS AS A WAY
OF UNDERCUTTING THE ENTIRE
APPROACH, THE WHOLE IDEA OF THE
DEATH PENALTY?
>> NO, WE ARE DOING WHAT THE
PRESIDENT HAS ASKED US TO DO AND
IT IS A LIMITED REVIEW OF THE
DEATH PENALTY AND HOW IT IS
IMPOSED, WHEN IT IS IMPOSED.
IT IS THE LAW OF THE LAND.
IT IS THE MOST SERIOUS THING
THAT I DO AS ATTORNEY GENERAL.
I HAVE TO MAKE DETERMINATIONS
ABOUT WHEN WE WILL SEEK THE
DEATH PENALTY AND I HAVE DONE
THAT AS ATTORNEY GENERAL EVEN
THOUGH I AM PERSONALLY OPPOSED
TO THE DEATH PENALTY AS ATTORNEY
GENERAL, I HAVE TO ENFORCE
FEDERAL LAW.
>> Woodruff: ATTORNEY GENERIC
ERIC, THANK YO -- ATTORNEY GENE,
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR YOUR TIME.
>> Ifill: MY CONVERSATION WITH
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL ALSO
PREVIEWS A SPEECH HE PLANS TO
GIVE TOMORROW IN PHILADELPHIA
ABOUT SENTENCING REFORM.
YOU CAN FIND THAT PORTION OF THE
INTERVIEW ONLINE.
>> Woodruff: AS WE HEARD, IT WAS
A CONFUSING DAY ON CAPITOL HILL
WITH DEEP DIVISIONS OVER
IMMIGRATION AND WHAT CAN BE DONE
TO ADDRESS A SURGE OF MIGRANT
CHILDREN FLOODING ACROSS THE
BORDER.
FEDERAL AGENCIES HANDLING THE
CRISIS SAY THEY WILL RUN OUT OF
MONEY IN MID-AUGUST IF NOTHING
IS DONE.
AND LAWMAKERS ARE ABOUT TO LEAVE
TOWN FOR A FIVE WEEK RECESS.
NEWSHOUR CAPITOL HILL PRODUCER
QUINN BOWMAN REPORTS ON TODAY'S
POLITCAL SEE-SAW.
>> ALL TIME FOR DEBATE HAS
EXPIRED.
>> Reporter: THE FIRST SIGN OF
TROUBLE CAME MID-DAY, WHEN
REPUBLICAN LEADERS ABRUPTLY
CALLED OFF A VOTE ON THEIR
BORDER BILL.
BUT LESS THAN TWO HOURS LATER,
HOUSE MAJORITY WHIP KEVIN
MCCARTHY INFORMED LAWMAKERS
THERE STILL COULD BE A VOTE
WHICH LED TO THIS EXCHANGE WITH
MINORITY WHIP STENY HOYER.
>> I WANT TO ADVISE ALL MEMBERS
THAT ADDITIONAL VOTES ARE
POSSIBLE TODAY.
>> WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO CALL
SOME MEMBERS BACK.
THEY ALREADY LEFT UNDER THE
REPRESENTATION THAT THIS WAS THE
LAST VOTE OF THE DAY.
I WOULD IMAGINE THAT YOU HAVE
SOME MEMBERS THAT ARE IN THAT
CATEGORY THEMSELVES.
>> I THINK IT IS POSSIBLE TO
ADVISE ALL MEMBERS THAT IT IS
POSSIBLE TO HAVE VOTES LATER
TODAY.
I'M HOPEFUL THAT BY LATE THIS
AFTERNOON WE'LL BE ABLE TO
NOTIFY THE TIME OF IT.
( BOOS )
>> Reporter: IN A STATEMENT,
G.O.P. LEADERS SAID THEY WILL
CONTINUE TO WORK ON SOLUTIONS TO
THE BORDER CRISIS.
BUT THEY ADDED THERE ARE
NUMEROUS STEPS THE PRESIDENT CAN
AND SHOULD BE TAKING RIGHT NOW,
WITHOUT THE NEED FOR
CONGRESSIONAL ACTION, TO SECURE
OUR BORDERS AND ENSURE THESE
CHILDREN ARE RETURNED SWIFTLY
AND SAFELY TO THEIR COUNTRIES.
WITH NEAR UNANIMOUS DEMOCRATIC
OPPOSITION, REPUBLICAN LEADERS
NEEDED THE SUPPORT OF THE VAST
MAJORITY OF THEIR MEMBERS, BUT
MANY VOICED SKEPTICISM OF THE
PROPOSAL IN ADVANCE OF THE VOTE.
REPRESENTATIVE MO BROOKS OF
ALABAMA:
>> WE CAN EASILY SOLVE THIS
PROBLEM BY SPENDING AS LITTLE AS
$30 MILLION A YEAR WITH RESPECT
TO THE ILLEGAL ALIEN CHILDREN
BECAUSE WE KNOW, THAT IS HOW
MUCH IT COSTS TO FLY EVERY
ILLEGAL ALIEN CHILD BACK TO
THEIR HOME COUNTRY AND REUNITE
THEM WITH THEIR FAMILIES.
>> Reporter: THE MEASURE OFFERED
BY G.O.P. LEADERS WOULD HAVE
COST $659 MILLION DOLLARS OVER
THE NEXT TWO MONTHS.
THAT TOTAL IS FAR LESS THAN THE
$1.5 BILLION HOUSE REPUBLICANS
INITIALLY SOUGHT.
OF THAT, SOME $400 MILLION WOULD
HAVE GONE TO THE DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY TO BOOST
BORDER PATROL OPERATIONS.
ANOTHER $197 MILLION HAD BEEN
TARGETED FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, THE
AGENCY TASKED WITH CARING FOR
THE CHILDREN.
THE HOUSE PLAN ALSO SOUGHT TO
CHANGE A 2008 ANTI-TRAFFICKING
LAW SIGNED BY PRESIDENT GEORGE
W. BUSH, IT REQUIRED THAT
UNACCOMPANIED CHILDREN FROM
COUNTRIES OTHER THAN MEXICO AND
CANADA RECEIVE A HEARING BEFORE
DEPORTATION.
THE TOP DEMOCRAT IN THE HOUSE,
NANCY PELOSI OF CALIFORNIA,
CALLED THE NEW PROPOSAL MEAN-
SPIRITED.
>> LET'S GIVE THE CHILDREN A
FAIR SHOT.
LET'S DO BETTER THAN THIS.
IT IS NOT A STATEMENT OF VALUES.
IT IS A STATEMENT OF MEANNESS.
>> Reporter: IN ORDER TO ENTICE
SOME CONSERVATIVE LAWMAKERS TO
SUPPORT THE SPENDING PLAN,
G.O.P. LEADERS ALSO PROPOSED A
VOTE TO DEFUND PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
DEFERRED ACTION PROGRAM.
THAT POLICY, IMPLEMENTED BY THE
PRESIDENT IN 2012, PROTECTS
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS FROM
DEPORTATION IF THEY WERE BROUGHT
TO THE U.S. AS CHILDREN.
SPEAKER BOEHNER SAID HIS MEMBERS
WANTED TO MAKE CLEAR TO THE
PRESIDENT THEY WOULD NOT ACCEPT
ANY MORE UNILATERAL STEPS.
>> WHEN THE PRESIDENT TAKES
THESE ACTIONS HE WILL BE SEALING
DEAL ON LEGACY OF LAWLESSNESS.
>> Reporter: IN THE END, THAT
WAS NOT ENOUGH TO SWAY WARY
CONSERVATIVES.
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE
CAPITOL, MEANWHILE, SENATORS
CONTINUED DEBATE ON A $2.7
BILLION PLAN PUT FORWARD BY
DEMOCRATS.
$1 BILLION LESS THAN THE
PRESIDENT'S REQUEST.
THAT PROPOSAL INCLUDES SPENDING
FOR ADDITIONAL DETENTION
FACILITIES AND MORE IMMIGRATION
JUDGES TO PROCESS MIGRANTS.
UNLIKE THE HOUSE BILL, THE
SENATE VERSION DOES NOT TWEAK
THE 2008 TRAFFICKING LAW.
BUT WITH LITTLE SIGN OF AN
AGREEMENT, BOTH SIDES TODAY
TRADED BLAME.
SENATE MINORITY LEADER MITCH
MCCONNELL CALLED ON THE
PRESIDENT TO STEP UP AND LEAD.
>> CONGRESS CAN'T DO IT WITHOUT
YOUR LEADERSHIP OR YOUR
ENGAGEMENT.
IT'S IMPOSSIBLE TO DO THIS
WITHOUT YOU.
SO PICK UP THAT PHONE YOU KEEP
TELLING US ABOUT.
>> Reporter: DEMOCRAT PATRICK
LEAHY OF VERMONT ACCUSED
REPUBLICANS OF STANDING IN THE
WAY OF PROGRESS.
>> IT IS SO MUCH EASIER NOT TO
DO ANYTHING.
JUST LET IT SIT THERE AND SAY,
"OH, IT MUST BE PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S FAULT."
"OH, IT MUST BE THE SENATE'S
FAULT."
"OH, IT MUST BE SOMEBODY ELSE'S
"OH, MAYBE IT'S THE FAULT OF
FAULT."
THESE SIX AND SEVEN-YEAR-OLD
"OH, MAYBE IT'S THE FAULT OF
CHILDREN FOR TRYING TO ESCAPE
THESE SIX AND SEVEN-YEAR-OLD
BEING KILLED OR MOLESTED."
CHILDREN FOR TRYING TO ESCAPE
>> Reporter: WITH SHARP
BEING KILLED OR MOLESTED."
DIVISIONS ON BOTH SIDES OF THE
>> Reporter: WITH SHARP
CAPITOL, LAWMAKERS APPEARED SET
DIVISIONS ON BOTH SIDES OF THE
TO LEAVE FOR A FIVE-WEEK RECESS
CAPITOL, LAWMAKERS APPEARED SET
WITH NO RESOLUTION TO THE BORDER
TO LEAVE FOR A FIVE-WEEK RECESS
CRISIS.
WITH NO RESOLUTION TO THE BORDER
>> Woodruff: FOR MORE ON TODAY'S
CRISIS.
EVENTS, THE WASHINGTON POST'S ED
>> Woodruff: FOR MORE ON TODAY'S
O'KEEFE JOINS US FROM CAPITOL
EVENTS, THE WASHINGTON POST'S ED
HILL.
O'KEEFE JOINS US FROM CAPITOL
ED, WHAT A SCENE.
HILL.
THE HOUSE REPUBLICAN LEADERSHIP
ED, WHAT A SCENE.
SAID THEY WANTED A BILL TO DEAL
THE HOUSE REPUBLICAN LEADERSHIP
WITH THE BORDER, BUT THEY
SAID THEY WANTED A BILL TO DEAL
COULDN'T GET IT.
WITH THE BORDER, BUT THEY
WHAT HAPPENED?
COULDN'T GET IT.
>> WELL, THEY PULLED THAT BILL
WHAT HAPPENED?
VERY QUICKLY, UNEXPECTEDLY
>> WELL, THEY PULLED THAT BILL
EARLIER THIS AFTERNOON,
VERY QUICKLY, UNEXPECTEDLY
SURPRISING EVERYONE, INCLUDING
EARLIER THIS AFTERNOON,
SEVERAL MEMBERS, AS YOU HEARD,
SURPRISING EVERYONE, INCLUDING
WHO HAD ALREADY HEADED FOR THE
SEVERAL MEMBERS, AS YOU HEARD,
AIRPORTS.
WHO HAD ALREADY HEADED FOR THE
BUT AFTER A REVOLT OF A HANDFUL
AIRPORTS.
OF REPUBLICANS IN, LET'S SAY,
BUT AFTER A REVOLT OF A HANDFUL
MORE PURPLE DISTRICTS, PLACES
OF REPUBLICANS IN, LET'S SAY,
LIKE CALIFORNIA, NEW YORK,
MORE PURPLE DISTRICTS, PLACES
PENNSYLVANIA, AREAS WITH GROWING
LIKE CALIFORNIA, NEW YORK,
LATINO POPULATIONS, ALSO, THEY
PENNSYLVANIA, AREAS WITH GROWING
CONFRONTED KEVIN McCARTHY AND
LATINO POPULATIONS, ALSO, THEY
THE SPEAKER ON THE FLOOR OF THE
CONFRONTED KEVIN McCARTHY AND
HOUSE AND SAID, NO, WE CAN'T
THE SPEAKER ON THE FLOOR OF THE
LEAVE WASHINGTON WITHOUT HAVING
HOUSE AND SAID, NO, WE CAN'T
VOTED OR AT LEAST TRYING TO VOTE
LEAVE WASHINGTON WITHOUT HAVING
ON SOMETHING SO THEY WERE
VOTED OR AT LEAST TRYING TO VOTE
DRAGGED INTO THE BASEMENT OF THE
ON SOMETHING SO THEY WERE
CAPITOL FOR AN EMERGENCY MEETING
DRAGGED INTO THE BASEMENT OF THE
AND EMERGED AN HOUR LATER SAYING
CAPITOL FOR AN EMERGENCY MEETING
THEY WILL STAY OVERNIGHT IN
AND EMERGED AN HOUR LATER SAYING
WASHINGTON, HAVE ANOTHER MEETING
THEY WILL STAY OVERNIGHT IN
TOMORROW AND PROBABLY VOTE ON
WASHINGTON, HAVE ANOTHER MEETING
SOMETHING AT SOME POINT FRIDAY.
TOMORROW AND PROBABLY VOTE ON
IN ESSENCE, THERE WAS A
SOMETHING AT SOME POINT FRIDAY.
DEADLINE, A DUE DATE, THE HOUSE
IN ESSENCE, THERE WAS A
DIDN'T MEET IT SO THE TEACHER IS
DEADLINE, A DUE DATE, THE HOUSE
KEEPING THEM OVERNIGHT AND
DIDN'T MEET IT SO THE TEACHER IS
THEY'LL HAVE TO DO IT TOMORROW.
KEEPING THEM OVERNIGHT AND
>> Woodruff: WHY IS THIS
THEY'LL HAVE TO DO IT TOMORROW.
IMPORTANT FOR THE REPUBLICAN
>> Woodruff: WHY IS THIS
HOUSE LEADERSHIP?
IMPORTANT FOR THE REPUBLICAN
>> ONE, FOR THE BROADER
HOUSE LEADERSHIP?
POLITICAL ARGUMENT OF RESPONDING
>> ONE, FOR THE BROADER
TO PRESIDENT OBAMA WHO ASKED FOR
POLITICAL ARGUMENT OF RESPONDING
THE MONEY AND WHO REPUBLICANS
TO PRESIDENT OBAMA WHO ASKED FOR
SAY HAS CREATED THIS CRISIS BY
THE MONEY AND WHO REPUBLICANS
NOT DOING CERTAIN THINGS.
SAY HAS CREATED THIS CRISIS BY
ALSO, YOU RUN THE RISK OF HAVING
NOT DOING CERTAIN THINGS.
THE PRESIDENT GO OUT AND DOING
ALSO, YOU RUN THE RISK OF HAVING
OTHER EXECUTIVE ACTIONS OVER THE
THE PRESIDENT GO OUT AND DOING
COURSE OF THE AUGUST RECESS AND
OTHER EXECUTIVE ACTIONS OVER THE
REPUBLICANS WOULD TURN AROUND
COURSE OF THE AUGUST RECESS AND
AND SAY, WELL, HERE HE GOES
REPUBLICANS WOULD TURN AROUND
AGAIN DOING THINGS ON HIS OWN
AND SAY, WELL, HERE HE GOES
WITHOUT TALKING TO CONGRESS AND
AGAIN DOING THINGS ON HIS OWN
THE WHITE HOUSE IN THIS CASE
WITHOUT TALKING TO CONGRESS AND
COULD TURN AROUND AND SAY, WELL,
THE WHITE HOUSE IN THIS CASE
YOU HAD AN OPPORTUNITY TO DO SO
COULD TURN AROUND AND SAY, WELL,
AND YOU DIDN'T AND THAT'S A
YOU HAD AN OPPORTUNITY TO DO SO
VALID ARGUMENT.
AND YOU DIDN'T AND THAT'S A
AND THERE ARE DOZENS OF
VALID ARGUMENT.
REPUBLICANS IN SWING DISTRICTS,
AND THERE ARE DOZENS OF
LIKE COLORADO, TEXAS, FLORIDA,
REPUBLICANS IN SWING DISTRICTS,
NEW YORK, THAT IF THEY GO HOME
LIKE COLORADO, TEXAS, FLORIDA,
NOT VOTING FOR SOMETHING COULD
NEW YORK, THAT IF THEY GO HOME
NOW FACE MORE PERILOUS
NOT VOTING FOR SOMETHING COULD
REELECTION FIGHTS IN DECEMBER.
NOW FACE MORE PERILOUS
I TALKED TO A LOYAL REPUBLICAN
REELECTION FIGHTS IN DECEMBER.
FROM TEXAS WHO REPRESENTS A
I TALKED TO A LOYAL REPUBLICAN
DISTRICTS WITH A GROWING
FROM TEXAS WHO REPRESENTS A
HISPANIC POPULATION AND HE SAYS
DISTRICTS WITH A GROWING
IF I GO BACK WITHOUT HAVING DONE
HISPANIC POPULATION AND HE SAYS
SOMETHING, WITHOUT HAVING VOTED
IF I GO BACK WITHOUT HAVING DONE
ON SOMETHING RELATED TO THIS
SOMETHING, WITHOUT HAVING VOTED
ISSUE, HE SAID, "I'LL HAVE SOME
ON SOMETHING RELATED TO THIS
EXPLAINING TO DO."
ISSUE, HE SAID, "I'LL HAVE SOME
>> Woodruff: BUT YOU ALSO HAVE
EXPLAINING TO DO."
CONSERVATIVE REPUBLICANS WHO ARE
>> Woodruff: BUT YOU ALSO HAVE
SAYING ABSOLUTELY, I DON'T WANT
CONSERVATIVE REPUBLICANS WHO ARE
TO GIVE THE PRESIDENT THE
SAYING ABSOLUTELY, I DON'T WANT
ABILITY TO EXPAND THIS, IF YOU
TO GIVE THE PRESIDENT THE
WILL, AMNESTY PROGRAM FOR THE
ABILITY TO EXPAND THIS, IF YOU
CHILDREN, THE SO-CALLED
WILL, AMNESTY PROGRAM FOR THE
DREAMERS, EXPANDING IT TO THE
CHILDREN, THE SO-CALLED
OTHER CHILDREN COMING ACROSS.
DREAMERS, EXPANDING IT TO THE
>> THAT'S RIGHT, ACHED WE'VE
OTHER CHILDREN COMING ACROSS.
SEEN ALL SORTS OF DIVISION IN
>> THAT'S RIGHT, ACHED WE'VE
THE REPUBLICAN RANKS OVER THE
SEEN ALL SORTS OF DIVISION IN
YEARS WHETHER FISCAL OR
THE REPUBLICAN RANKS OVER THE
IMMIGRATION POLICY AND THIS IS
YEARS WHETHER FISCAL OR
PART OF THE REASON WHY WE HAVE
IMMIGRATION POLICY AND THIS IS
NOT YET SEEN THIS REPUBLICAN-LED
PART OF THE REASON WHY WE HAVE
HOUSE VOTE ON SIGNIFICANT
NOT YET SEEN THIS REPUBLICAN-LED
IMMIGRATION LEGISLATION BECAUSE
HOUSE VOTE ON SIGNIFICANT
THE DIFFERENCES ARE JUST SO BIG
IMMIGRATION LEGISLATION BECAUSE
THEY HAVEN'T BEEN ABLE TO BRIDGE
THE DIFFERENCES ARE JUST SO BIG
A DIVIDE.
THEY HAVEN'T BEEN ABLE TO BRIDGE
SO SOMETIME TONIGHT OVERNIGHT
A DIVIDE.
REPUBLICAN LEADERS ARE SUPPOSED
SO SOMETIME TONIGHT OVERNIGHT
TO MEET WITH THAT GROUP OF
REPUBLICAN LEADERS ARE SUPPOSED
REPUBLICANS TO SAY, NO, UNLESS
TO MEET WITH THAT GROUP OF
YOU'RE SHUTTING DOWN THE
REPUBLICANS TO SAY, NO, UNLESS
DEFERRED ACTION PROGRAM FOR THE
YOU'RE SHUTTING DOWN THE
IMMIGRANTS PRESIDENT OBAMA PUT
DEFERRED ACTION PROGRAM FOR THE
IN ACTION, OR UNLESS YOU'RE
IMMIGRANTS PRESIDENT OBAMA PUT
SECURING SOME PARTS OF THE
IN ACTION, OR UNLESS YOU'RE
BORDER THEY CAN'T VOTE FOR IT.
SECURING SOME PARTS OF THE
OTHER REPUBLICANS WHO FEEL DOING
BORDER THEY CAN'T VOTE FOR IT.
THAT KIND OF THING MIGHT BE A
OTHER REPUBLICANS WHO FEEL DOING
BRIDGE TOO FAR.
THAT KIND OF THING MIGHT BE A
IT'S A NEW TEST WITH THE NEW
BRIDGE TOO FAR.
LEADERSHIP.
IT'S A NEW TEST WITH THE NEW
KEVIN McCARTHY HAS RISEN TO
LEADERSHIP.
THE MAJORITY LEADER POSITION AND
KEVIN McCARTHY HAS RISEN TO
PUTS HIM IN A TRICKY POSITION
THE MAJORITY LEADER POSITION AND
STARTING HIS NEW JOB.
PUTS HIM IN A TRICKY POSITION
>> Woodruff: LOOKS LIKE A VOTE
STARTING HIS NEW JOB.
TOMORROW MORNING?
>> Woodruff: LOOKS LIKE A VOTE
>> YES, THE LATEST GUIDANCE.
TOMORROW MORNING?
THE SENATE WILL FINISH UP
>> YES, THE LATEST GUIDANCE.
TONIGHT AND WE'LL SEE IF THEY
THE SENATE WILL FINISH UP
CAN GED IT DONE.
TONIGHT AND WE'LL SEE IF THEY
>> Woodruff: ED O'KEEFE,
CAN GED IT DONE.
"WASHINGTON POST," THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: ED O'KEEFE,
>> TAKE TEAR, JUDY.
>> Ifill: ONE ISSUE THAT DID
GARNER BI-PARTISAN SUPPORT THIS
WEEK ON CAPITOL HILL WAS A
PROPOSAL TO REDUCE THE NUMBER OF
SEXUAL ASSAULTS ON COLLEGE
CAMPUSES.
LAST NIGHT WE HEARD FROM TWO
SENATORS WHO SPONSORED THE BILL.
BUT SOME IN THE WORLD OF HIGHER
EDUCATION ARE PUSHING BACK.
HARI SREENIVASAN EXPLORES SOME
OF TCR
>> Reporter: THE LEGISLATION
WOULD CREATE STEEPER PENALTIES
FOR SCHOOLS THAT FAIL TO
INVESTIGATE REPORTS OF ASSAULT.
IT ALSO FEATURES PROVISIONS TO
CHANGE THE CULTURE ON SOME
CAMPUSES, INCLUDING REQUIRING
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES TO
DESIGNATE CONFIDENTIAL ADVISORS
WHO WOULD PROVIDE SUPPORT AND
INFORMATION TO VICTIMS.
THAT INCLUDES GUIDANCE ON HOW TO
REPORT THE CRIME TO LOCAL LAW
ENFORCEMENT
UNIVERSITIES WOULD ALSO HAVE TO
CONDUCT ANNUAL SURVEYS ABOUT
STUDENT EXPERIENCES WITH SEXUAL
ASSAULT AND PUBLISH THOSE
RESULTS ONLINE.
ANNE NEAL IS THE PRESIDENT OF
THE AMERICAN COUNCIL OF TRUSTEES
AND ALUMNI.
BECAUSE YOU DON'T THINK THIS
LEGISLATION WILL HELP SOLVE WHAT
WE KNOW IS A SERIOUS PROBLEM.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
IT IS A SERIOUS PROBLEM.
WE SHOULD ALL BE DEEPLY
CONCERNED ABOUT SEXUAL ASSAULT
BUT THE QUESTION REALLY IS WHERE
SHOULD THE ONUS BE TO DEAL WITH
THIS PROBLEM?
THIS LEGISLATION AND OTHER
ACTIONS COMING OUT OF THE
DTM OF EDUCATION AND THE
VICE PRESIDENT'S OFFICE WOULD
PUT IT ON COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES.
QUITE FRANKLY, WE HAVE THE
CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM AND
POLICE DEPARTMENTS AND IT'S OUR
CONTENTION THAT'S WHERE THE ONUS
SHOULD LIE.
WE HAVE THIS CRIMINAL JUSTICE
SYSTEM AND RATHER THAN TRYING TO
MAKE OUR COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES AN EXTENSION OF LAW
ENFORCEMENT, LET'S PUT THE
RESPONSIBILITY WHERE IT SHOULD
BE IN THE POLICE ROOM AND THE
COURT.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU SAID THIS
DUPLICATES REPORTI
ARE ALREADY LAWS ON THE BOOKS
THAT SAY THE UNIVERSITIES HAVE
TO REPORT THE CRIMES.
BUT AS SENATOR CLAIRE
McCASKILL LAST NIGHT POINTED
OUT, THERE SEEMS TO BE A
SIGNIFICANT UNDERREPORTING
PROBLEM.
>> THE MORE STARTLING STATISTIC
IS 40% OF THE COLLEGE CAMPUSES
IN THE COUNTRY HAVE NOT
INVESTIGATED A SINGLE CASE TO
HAVE SEXUAL ASSAULT IN FIVE
YEARS AND WE KNOW THIS IS A
SILENT EPIDEMIC ON COLLEGE
CAMPUSES.
>> Sreenivasan: RESPONO
THAT?
>> AGAIN, WE WANT TRANSPARENCY
AND WANT UNIVERSITIES TO REPORT
WHAT'S HAPPENING BUT OUR
EXPERIENCE IS IF YOU ALLOW
SHADOW JUSTICE SYSTEMS ON CAMPUS
AND THE ALLOW THE INFORMATION TO
STAY ON THE CAMPUS RATHER THAN
GOING TO ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITIES
THAT YOU'RE MORE LIKELY TO HAVE
THE UNIVERSITY HIDING WHAT'S
HAPPENING THAN BEING FORTHRIGHT
ABOUT IT.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT IS THE
SHADOW SYSTEM, FOR FOLKS WHO
HAVEN'T BEEN PAYING ATTENTION?
>> WELL, AGAIN, THIS YOU SEE WE
HAVE A SYSTEM WHICH HAS
INVESTIGATORS TRAINED ON COLLEGE
CAMPUSES, BUREAUCRACIES
ENVISIONED BY THIS LEGISLATION
THAT WOULD REQUIRE FOLKS ON
UNIVERSITY CAMPUSES ESSENTIALLY
TO BE INVESTIGATORS, JURORS,
EXECUTIONERS.
THEY TIER ONES WHO ARE GOING TO
BE LOOKING INTO ALLEGED
VIOLATIONS.
WE'RE SAYING COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES HAVE MANY THINGS
AND MANY EXPERTISE, BUT ENGAGING
IN LAW ENFORCEMENT IS NOT ONE OF
THEM, AND THAT'S WHY IT'S SO
IMPORTANT THAT WE INSIST THAT
THE ALLEGED VICTIMS REPORT THEIR
PROBLEMS TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AND
THAT THE UNIVERSITY MAKE IT VERY
CLEAR THAT THAT IS WHERE THE
ONUS LIES.
>> SO ARE YOU CONCERNED AS
SENATOR KELLY AYOTTE WAS ON THE
PROGRAM LAST NIGHT THAT SOME OF
THESE UNIVERSITIES, JUSTICE IS
NOT BEING SERVED WITH THEIR OWN
INFRASTRUCTURES PUT IN PLACE.
>> IT'S BEING INVESTIGATED
INCONSISTENTLY.
WE ALSO FOUND IN SOME INSTANCES
ATHLETIC DEPARTMENTS WERE
INVESTIGATING THEM.
THIS IS TOTALLY INAPPROPRIATE.
THERE NEEDS TO BE THE BEST
PRACTICES, FULL INVESTIGATION
AND, OBVIOUSLY, VICTIMS NEED TO
BE SUPPORTED, WHICH IS NOT
HAPPENING.
>> Sreenivasan: YOUR RESPONSE?
THAT ABSOLUTELY SUPPORTS THE
POINT THAT THE COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES ARE NOT EQUIPPED TO
DO GOOD INVESTIGATIONS AND
ESSENTIALLY TO BE ASKED TO BE
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.
THAT'S WHY WE THINK THE PROPER
FOCUS IS IN OUR POLICE
DEPARTMENTS AND OUR COURTS WHICH
IS WHERE STUDENTS SHOULD GO.
IF THEY HAVE BEEN RAPED, IF
THERE HAS BEEN A SEXUAL ASSAULT,
IT NEEDS TO BE TREATED AS A
CRIME.
THIS WILL ALLOWS THEN TO GIVE
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES TIME
TO DO WHAT THEY DO WELL, WHICH
IS NOT SERVING AS LAW
ENFORCEMENT BUT DEALING WITH
EDUCATION.
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
REMEMBER THAT THE SEXUAL ASSAULT
PROBLEM THAT WE'RE SEEING DOES
NOT OCCUR IN A VACUUM AND IN
LARGE PART IS BECAUSE OF A LACK
OF ACADEMIC SERIOUSNESS ON OUR
COLLEGE CAMPUSES, WHETHER IT'S
CURRICULA OR ANYTHING GOES,
HEAVY DRINKING, BINGE DRINKING
WE HEAR ABOUT A LOT, THE FACT
MANY STUDENTS START SCHOOL ON
TUESDAYS AND ENDS THURSDAYS, IS
IT ANY WONDER THAT WE HAVE A
DRINKING PROBLEM AND THE SEXUAL
ASSAULT THAT COMES WITH IT?
IT'S TIME OUR ACADEMIC
ADMINISTRATORS START FOCUSING ON
THE EDUCATIONAL PROBLEMS AND NOT
BE FORCED INTO THIS DIFFICULT
POSITION FOR WHICH THEY'RE NOT
EQUIPPED TO BE LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICIALS ON THEIR CAMPUSES.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW MUCH OF
THE CONCERN IS COST DRIVEN IN
TERMS OF HOW MUCH IT WILL COST
TO ROLL OUT THE SURVEY EVERY
YEAR OR TRAIN THE CONFIDENTIAL
ADVISORS?
>> VERY GOOD QUESTION AND
THINK THIS IS A SERIOUS, SERIOUS
CONCERN FOR COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES P.
WE KNOW PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS
REGULARLY RAISED CONCERN ABOUT
THE RISING COST OF COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES AND, SO, I THINK WE
HAVE TO ASK OURSELVES WHAT ARE
THINGS COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES
ARE EQUIPPED AND AR DO
AND THEREFORE CAN BEAR THOSE
COSTS AND WHAT WOULD IT BE
BETTER FOR OTHER INSTITUTIONS
AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONS TO DO?
AND I THINK THIS IS EXACTLY ONE
OF THOSE.
LET'S PUT COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES BACK FOCUSING ON
EDUCATION RATHER THAN HAVING TO
SPEND VAST RESOURCES WHICH ARE
QUITE LIMITED, AS WE ALL KNOW,
ON TRAINING OF THE VARIOUS
BUREAUCRATS THAT WILL BE DEALING
WITH STUDENTS, TRAINING TRAUMA
ADVISORS AND TITLE 9
COORDINATORS AND THE LIST OF
VARIOUS BUREAUCRATS WE ARE GOING
TO BE ADDING THE TO OUR COLLEGE
CAMPUS GOES ON AND ON AT A TIME
WHEN WE'RE ALREADY SEEING
ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS SKYROCKET.
>> Sreenivasan: ANNE NEAL,
PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL OF
TRUSTEES AND ALUMNI, THANK YOU
SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: WE RETURN NOW TO
THE ONGOING BATTLE BETWEEN HAMAS
AND ISRAEL.
AND QUESTIONS BEING RAISED ABOUT
WHETHER EITHER SIDE IS VIOLATING
THE LAWS OF WAR.
JOINING US ARE RETIRED
LIEUTENANT COLONEL GARY SOLIS.
HE HAD A 26 YEAR CAREER IN THERS
IN VIETNAM AND BECAME A MILITARY
LAWYER AND JUDGE.
HE'S NOW ON THE FACULTY AT BOTH
GEORGE WASHINGTON AND GEORGETOWN
UNIVERSITY LAW SCHOOLS.
AND RETIRED LIEUTENANT COLONEL
GEOFFREY CORN.
HE HAD A 22 YEAR CAREER IN THE
ARMY WHERE HE SERVED AS A
LAWYER.
HE'S NOW A PROFESSOR AT SOUTH
TEXAS COLLEGE OF LAW IN HOUSTON.
WE WELCOME YOU BOTH TO THE
"NewsHour".
CAN YOU FIRST, COL. CORN, WE
WANT TO TALK ABOUT BOTH SIDES IN
THE CONFLICT.
LET'S START WITH HAMAS.
WHAT IS IT YOU BELIEVE HAMAS IS
DOING THAT VIOLATES
INTERNATIONAL LAW?
>> WELL, I THINK THE TWO MOST
OBVIOUS EXAMPLES ARE THE
DELIBERATE ATTACK ON CIVILIAN
POPULATION CENTERS WITH
APPARENTLY NO EFFORT TO TARGET
SPECIFIC MILITARY TARGETS IN
ISRAEL, JUST FIRING MISSILES IN
THE DIRECTION OF ISRAELI
POPULATIONT A CLEAR
VIOLATION OF THE LAW AND THE
OTHER IS LOCATING THE VITAL
MILITARY ASSETS WITHIN THE MIDST
OF THE CIVILIAN POPULATION IN AN
APPARENT ATTEMPT TO MAKE IT MORE
DIFFICULT FOR THE ISRAELI
DEFENSE FORCES TO TARGET THOSE
ASSETS WHICH IS ALSO A CORE
VIOLATION OF THE LAW.
>> Woodruff: AND WHAT
INTERNATIONAL LAW ARE YOU
REFERRING TO?
>> WELL, THE INTERNATIONAL LAW
THAT I'M REFERRING TO AND I'M
SURE MY FRIEND GARY WILL REFER
TO WE CALL THE LAW OF WAR OR IS
OFTEN CALLED INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW AND IT'S ONE OF
THE OLDEST BODIES OF
INTERNATIONAL LAW.
MANY OF THESE RULES ARE CODIFIED
IN TREATIES THAT ARE FINDING
ON -- BINDING ON NATIONS
THROUGHOUT THE WORLD, INCLUDING
ISRAELIS, AND EVEN RULES NOT
APPLICABLE TO TREATY LAW APPLY
TO ALL PARTIES OF A CONFLICT AS
A MATTER OF WHAT WE CALL
CUSTOMARY INTERNATIONAL LAW, AND
THERE IS ALMOST UNIVERSAL
AGREEMENT THESE RULES APPLY TO
ALL SIDES OF A CONFLICT.
ISRAELI AND HAMAS COLLECTIVELY.
>> Woodruff: YOU AGREE THESE
ARE LAWS THIS DISCUSSION IS
BASED ON?
>> YES, ENTIRELY.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ABOUT HIS
POINTS?
HE MADE TWO POINTS, THAT THEY
HAMAS IS DELIBERATELY FIRING
INTO CIVILIAN AREAS AND, TWO,
THEY ARE COMMINGLING MILITARY
ASSETS, WEAPONS, ROCKET
LAUNCHERS WITH THEIR OWN
CIVILIANS.
>> I THINK GEOFF IS ENTIRELY
CORRECT AND WE SEE THE SAME
THING GOING ON IN ISRAEL.
>> Woodruff: BUT THE TWO OF
YOU ARE IN AGREEMENT ON WHAT
HAMAS IS DOING?
>> WE ARE.
I THINK HAMAS IS IN VIOLATION OF
LAW OF CONFLICT, INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW FOR REASONS
GEOFF MENTIONED.
>> Woodruff: NO IFs, ANDS OR
BUTS.
>> NO I. LET ME TURN TO HOW YOU
VIEW ISRAEL, COL. CORN, BECAUSE
YOU BELIEVE ISRAEL IS ALSO
VIOLATING INTERNATIONAL LAW?
>> YES, I'M AFRAID.
SO I THINK ISRAEL IS VIOLATING
THE CORE PRINCIPALS OF THE LAW
OF ARMED CONFLICT OF DISTINCTION
AND PROPORTIONALITY.
THAT IS, THEY'RE NOT
DISTINGUISHING BETWEEN MILITARY
OBJECTIVES AND CIVILIAN OBJECTS
AND CIVILIANS THEMSELVES.
AND IN REGARD TO POPRO-RUSSIAN
THAT --
>> Woodruff: BACK UP.
CAN YOU EXPAND ON WHAT YOU MEAN
BY THAT?
>> DISTINCTION?
YES.
THE LAW OF ARMED CONFLICT SAYS
THAT PARTIES TO A CONFLICT, BE
IT AN INTERSTATE ON FLOOD VICTIR
NON-INTERSTATE CONFLICT, A STATE
ON ONE SIDE AND ARMED OPPOSITION
GROUP ON THE OTHER, IN SUCH
CONFLICTS THE PARTIES ARE BOUND
TO TARGET ONLY COMBATANTS AND
NOT TARGET CIVILIANSPU
OR CIVILIAN OBJECTS EITHER ONE.
TO DO SO IS A VIOLATION OF
DISTINCTION, PERHAPS THE
PRINCIPAL CORE CONCEPT IN IF LAW
OF WAR AND ISRAEL IS NOT DOING
THAT.
>> Woodruff: YOU'RE SAYING
THEY'RE NOT MAKING THE
DISTINCTION AND SHOULD BE.
COL. CORN, WHAT ABOUT THAT POINT
THAT ISRAEL IS DOING?
>> I WOULD HAVE TO RESPECTFULLY
DISAGREE WITH MY FRIEND GARY.
I THINK, FIRST OFF, DON'T
HAVE ENOUGH INFORMATION TO
CONCLUSIVELY TO ESTABLISH THAT
ISRAEL IS VIOLATING EVEN THE
DISTINCTION OF PROPORTIONALITY.
BOTH OF THESE PRINCIPLES ARE
APPLIED IN A FACT AND
SITUATION-SPECIFIC CONTEXT.
I THINK THERE HAVE BEEN
INCIDENTS THAT RAISE CONCERN
THAT THERE MAY BE VIOLATIONS BUT
WE HAVE TO KNOW MORE DETAILS
ABOUT WHY TARGETS WERE ATTACKED,
WE HAVE TO HAVE MORE DETAILS
ABOUT WHAT WAS IN PROXIMITY OF
THOSE TARGETS, DID HAMAS HAVE
MILITARY ASSETS EMBEDDED IN
CIVILIAN AREAS AND MAYBE EVEN
THE POSSIBILITY THAT THERE WERE
MISTAKES MADE AROUND AND OFF
COURSE OR THAT A SOLDIER OR
PILOT SIMPLY MADE AN ERROR.
WHAT I WOULD SAY IS I THINK WE
SEE AN OVERALL EFFORT ON THE
PART OF THE I.D.F. TO APPLY THE
LAW IN GOOD FAITH.
THEY'VE ISSUED MORE WARNINGS
THAN I CAN THINK OF ANY
PROFESSIONAL MILITARY
ORGANIZATION ISSUING IN AN URBAN
ATTACK, TO MY KNOWLEDGE.
THEY EMBED MILITARY LAWYERS TO
ADVISE COMMANDERS ON THEIR
OBLIGATIONS AT EVERY COMMAND.
SO WE HAVE TO BE CAUTIOUS ABOUT
REACHING THAT CONCLUSION AT THIS
POINT.
>> Woodruff: HE'S SAYING, ONE
THERE'S NOT ENOUGH INFORMATION
AND, TWO -- WELL, YOU HEARD HIM.
I WON'T REPEAT IT.
>> NO, I DISAGREE WITH GEOFF.
I THINK THE FACTS WE'VE SEEN ON
THE GROUND, THE STATEMENTS FROM
THE U.N., THE PHOTOGRAPHS WE'VE
SEEN ARE INDICATIVE OF A UNIT,
OF A COMMAND THAT IS NOT OVERLY
CONCERNED WITH DISTINCTION, AND
I THINK THE ISRAELIS HAVE THE
ABILITY TO BE MUCH MORE
DISCERNING IN THEIR TARGETING
AND THEY ARE NOT, IN MY OPINION.
>> Woodruff: WHY DO YOU THINK
THEY HAVE THE ABILITY TO BE MORE
DISCERNING?
>> BECAUSE THEIR WEAPONRY IS NOR
SOPHISTICATED AND ADVANCED.
THEY HAVE DRONES AND HELICOPTERS
IN THE AIR.
THEY KNOW WHERE THEY ARE FIRING
THEIR WEAPONS ANDAR
NOT A PINPOINT SYSTEM BUT IT HAS
THE ABILITY TO HONE IN ON
SPECIFIC TARGETS, WHICH ABILITY
IS NOT BEING EXERCISED FULLY.
>> Woodruff: COL. CORN, WHAT
ABOUT THAT?
>> WELL, FIRST OFF, I THINK IF
THE FACTS PLAY OUT AND ESTABLISH
THAT, THERE NEEDS TO BE AN
INVESTIGATION OF INDIVIDUALS WHO
VIOLATE THESE RULES AND THEY
SHOULD BE HELD ACCOUNTABLE BY
ISRAELIS THEMSELVES.
BUT I WOULD NOTE THIS IS THE
MOST DIFFICULT TYPE OF COMBAT
ANY MILITARY CAN ENGAGE IN.
EVERY MILITARY COMMANDER IS
TRAINED FROM INCEPTION TO AVOID
CLOSE COMBAT IN AN URBAN
ENVIRONMENT AT ALL COSTS.
THE FACT THAT THE ISRAELIS HAVE
PUT GROUND TROOPS INTO THIS
ENVIRONMENT I THINK INDICATES
HOW SERIOUS THEY SEE THIS
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE, BUT IT ALSO
MEANS THAT THIS IS AN INCREDIBLY
COMPLEX AND DIFFICULT TACTICAL
ENVIRONMENT, AND YOU CANNOT JUST
LOOK ONLY AT THE EFFECTS OF
COMBAT BECAUSE THAT CAN PROVIDE
A DISTORTING EFFECT ON THE
ANALYSIS.
YOU HAVE TO LOOK AT THE ENTIRE
SITUATION TO DECIDE WHETHER OR
NOT THERE WAS A VIOLATION.
>> Woodruff: YOU WANT TO
RESPOND QUICKLY?
AND THEN I HAVE A FINAL
QUESTION.
>> I SIMPLY DISAGREE WITH GEOFF.
I BELIEVE THERE IS SUFFICIENT
EVIDENCE OF AN AWARENIS OF
PROPORTIONALITY AND DISREGARD OF
THE ISRAELIS AND IS EVIDENCED BY
THE FACTS ON THE GROUND.
>> Woodruff: WHEN A CONFLICT
IS UNDERWAY AS HAS BEEN THERE
FOR MORE THAN 20 DAYS, HOW MUCH
DOES IT MATTER WHETHER
INTERNATIONAL LAWS HAVE BEEN
VIOLATED?
IS ONE SIDE OR THE OTHER GOING
TO BE HELD ACCOUNTABLE, DO YOU
BELIEVE?
>> I BELIEVE THEY WILL NOT, AT
THE END OF THE DAY, ALTHOUGH THE
VIOLATIONS, IN MY OPINION, ARE
CLEAR, AND THAT'S BECAUSE THE
U.N. SECURITY COUNCIL WILL HAVE
A MEMBER TO EXERCISE A VETO
SHOULD ISRAEL BE BROUGHT BEFORE
THEM AND I DON'T BELIEVE THE
I.C.J. NOR THE I.C.C. WILL TAKE
UP THE CASE, THE INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT.
>> Woodruff: COL. CORN, SHOULD
ONE SIDE OR BOTH SIDES BE HELD
ACCOUNTABLE?
>> FIRST OFF, I THINK IT'S CLEAR
INTERNATIONAL LAW MATTERS.
THAT'S WHY WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
THIS ON THIS VENUE, THAT'S WHY
THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY IS
SO CONCERNED ABOUT WHAT'S
HAPPENING BECAUSE THEY'RE
FOCUSED ON THE LAW AND THE
EXPECTATIONS OF COMPLIANCE WITH
THE LAW.
I AGREE WITH GARY THAT IT'S
UNLIKELY THAT THERE BE AN
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
ACCOUNTABILITY FOR THESE
ACTIONS, BUT I DON'T THINK THAT
MEANS THERE WON'T BE
ACCOUNTABILITY.
I TEND TO BELIEVE THAT IF THE
ISRAELIS CONCLUDE, AFTER THE
CONFLICT, AFTER THEY'VE REVIEWED
EVERYTHING, THAT SOME OF THEIR
COMMANDERS ACTED IMPROPERLY,
THAT THEY WILL TAKE ACTION
AGAINST THEM, AND THEY'VE DONE
THAT IN THE PAST.
I'M NOT SURE HAMAS WILL BE
SUBJECTED TO ANY RESPONSIBILITY.
>> Woodruff: COL. CORN AND
GARY SOLIS, WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: FINALLY TONIGHT, A
STORY OF A FLOOD, FIDDLES AND A
TOWN'S SURVIVAL.
JEFFREY BROWN TRAVELED TO
COLORADO FOR OUR STORY.
>> Brown: THE SONG IS CALLED
"LITTLE RAIN" BUT IT'S ABOUT A
BIG RAIN AND IT'S AFTERMATH, THE
FLOODING OF A TOWN IN COLORADO
IN THE FOOTHILLS OF THE ROCKIES
LAST SEPTEMBER.
>> WE'RE TRYING TO ADDRESS WHAT
HAPPENS AND ALSO REPRESENT, YOU
KNOW, OUR STRENGTHS AND EVEN THE
STRENGTH OF SPIRIT AND OUR JOY
T  HAVE IN THIS TOWN
BUT STILL EXPRESS THE GRAVITY OF
WHAT HAPPENS.
>> Brown: WHAT HAPPENED IS
SOMETHING NO ONE HERE HAD EVER
SEEN.
THE RIVER JUMPING ITS BANKS.
VIDEO SHOT BY LOCAL RESIDENTS
CAPTURED THE SCENE AS THE RIVER
DIVIDED LYONS INTO A SERIES OF
ISLANDS CUTTING OFF THIS SMALL
TOWN OF 2,000 FROM THE WORLD FOR
THREE DAYS, ONE PERSON DIED, 200
HOUSES DAMAGED.
MUSICIAN DAVID TILLER TALKED TO
THE "NewsHour" JUST AFTER HE
WAS EVACUATED.
>> SEEING THE FACES OF THE
HOUSES BLOWN ON AND REALIZING
NOTHING OF THE HOUSE WAS
SALVAGEABLE.
I DON'T EVEN KNOW HOW TO
DESCRIBE IT.
>> Brown: IN ALL, 20% OF
LYON'S HOUSING STOCK WAS LOST
AND THE TOWN SUFFERED
$50 MILLION IN DAMAGES.
MUSIC HAS BEEN A BIG PART OF THE
COMMUNITY.
THIS WAS A FLOODED LAKE, BUT NOW
IS ONE OF THE NATIONS LEADING
AND LONGEST RUNNING BLUEGRASS
FESTIVALS.
THE ROCKY GRASS FESTIVAL IS AN
ANNUAL CELEBRATION OF BLUEGRASS
ATTRACTING SOME 5,000 PEOPLE AND
MAJOR FIGURES FROM THIS MUSICAL
WORLD FOR 42 YEARS.
FESTIVAL DIRECTOR CRAIG FERGUSON
LIVES ON THE GROUND, AND LAST
SEPTEMBER AS TH THE EVACUATION
ORDER CAME, HE LEFT IN A HURRY
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT.
WHEN HE RETURNED, HE FOUND HIS
LAND, HIS BUSINESS, THAT IS, AND
HIS HOUSE UNDER FOUR FEET OF
WATER.
MUCH OF IT LATER TURNED TO MUTT
FILLED WITH DE-- MUD FILLED WITH
DEBRIS THAT HAD BEEN CARRIED
DOWN THE RIVER.
>> WE TOOK OVER 1,000 DUMP
TRUCKS OF GRAVEL, SILT AND SAND
OUT OF HERE.
OVER 1,000.
THAT TOOK US -- THEY WERE GOING
AROUND THE CLOCK FOR TWO MONTHS.
WE HAD FOUR BACKHOES AND TWO
EXCAVATORS OUT THEORY FOR SIX
MONTHS.
>> Brown: FERGUSON WAS
DETERMINED THE SHOW WOULD GO ON.
ROCKY GRASS IS ABOUT THE MUSIC,
OF COURSE, BUT ALSO ABOUT THE
COMMUNITY OF PERFORMERS AND
AUDIENCE MEMBERS WHO COME YEAR
AFTER YEAR.
AND FOR THIS SMALL TOWN, IT'S AN
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ENGINE.
(APPLAUSE)
SO GETTING IT UP AND RUNNING HAD
ECONOMIC AS WELL AS
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEANING.
>> I THINK ROCKY GRASSING
OPENING IS A SIGNAL TO THE TOWN.
I KNOW A LOT OF PEOPLE IN TOWN
ARE EXCITED THAT, OKAY, WE CAN
START HAVING FUN AGAIN.
>> Brown: THE FESTIVITIESRYORNIT
10:00 A.M. WITH A MAD DASH.
A FRIENDLY RUNNING OF THE TARPS
SET TO THE VERY NONBLUE GRASSY
WILLIAM TELL OVERTURE.
PRIME REAL ESTATE FOR THE ACTS.
ALISON KRAUSE AND UNION STATION
AMONG THEM.
AND BANJO MASTER BELA FLECK AND
HIS WIFE ABIGAIL WASHBURN.
THEY PROVIDE SEPARATE ENSEMBLES
BUT ARE NOW TEAMED UP FOR THE
FIRST TIME.
LIKE OTHER ROCKY GRASS VETERANS,
THEY WERE DETERMINED TO RETURN
AFTER THE FLOOD.
>> THERE'S LITTLE DOUBT THE
FESTIVAL WAS GOING TO HAPPEN AT
ALL.
IT WAS A REAL IMPORTANT YEAR TO
COME BACK AND DO SOMETHING.
>> TO BE A PART OF THIS
NCREDIBLE COMMUNITY THAT HAS,
AGAINST ALL ODDS, FOUND A WAY TO
RECLAIM THIS LAND AND TURN IT
INTO THE FESTIVAL SITE IT ONCE
WAS.
>> Brown: IT ALL LOOKED AND
ANDED GREAT.
BUT THERE WAS ALSO THIS.
THE SO-CALLED HOMELESS BAND.
THE PICKUP GROUP OF MUSICIANS
AND CHILDREN WHO LOST THEIR
HOMES IN THE FLOOD AND ALL THESE
MONTHS LATER ARE LIVING IN
TEMPORARY HOUSING, UNCERTAIN
WHAT HAPPENS NEXT.
BARRY McCRUMB WAS PLAYING
BANJO AND SINGING.
HE SHOWED US WHERE HIS HOUSE
ONCE STOOD.
>> THE FRONT DOOR WAS HERE.
>> Brown: HE HAD FLOOD
INSURANCE BUT THAT COVERED JUST
HALF HIS LOSSES.
>> THEY ONLY PAY FOR THE PART
THAT TOUCHED THE WATER WHICH IS
3.5 FEET IN MY HOUSE BUT THE DRY
WALL ABOVE THEY WON'T COVER.
>> HE'S FRUSTRATED WAITING FOR
PERMISSION FROM THE TOWN TO
REBUILD.
MOST HOUSES WERE BUILT BEFORE
STRICT GOVERNMENT REGULATIONS
WERE IN PLACE ABOUT BUILDING IN
FLOOD PLAINS.
TO QUALIFY FOR FEDERAL AID, THE
TOWN MUST ENFORCE THE RULES BUT
THAT RED TAPE HAS LED TO LENGTHY
DELAYS ISSUING PERMITS.
>> IT'S THE MIDDLE OF THE SUMMER
AND IN COLORADO THERE'S ONLY SO
MANY WEEKS WE CAN BUILD BECAUSE
OF THE HARSH WEATHER THAT COMES
IN OCTOBER, AND I HOPE TO HAVE A
HOUSCLHIS BY THAT
TIME.
IT DOESN'T SEEM LIKE IT'S GOING
TO HAPPEN.
>> THE RIVER'S RIGHT HERE.
IT'S A LOT OF MIXED EMOTIONS.
>> Brown: MUSICIAN DANNY
SHAFFER LIVED WITH HIS FAMILY IN
A MOBILE HOME IN THIS FIELD THAT
HAD BEEN A TRAILER PARK.
>> WITH THE FESTIVAL THIS
WEEKEND, IT ALMOST AEASTERN
PIERCE LYONS IS BACK TO NORMAL
BUT IT'S NOT AT ALL.
THERE'S A LOT OF PEOPLE
MISPLACED AND DON'T KNOW IF THEY
WILL COME BACK.
>> Brown: THE FLOOD WIPED OUT
30 TRAILERS IN THE PARK.
TODAY IT WAS USED A AS LOT FOR
THE MUSIC FESTIVAL.
FUTURE IS UNCLEAR BUT ONE THING
IT LIKELY WON'T BE IS A TRAILER
PARK.
SHAFFER WANTS TO STAY IN LYONS
BUT NOW MUST PAY DOUBLE RENT.
>> THE TOWN IS MADE UP OF PEOPLE
OF ALL KINDS OF ECONOMIC
SITUATIONS AND THAT'S WONDERFUL
AND IT STANDS A CHANCE TO BE
CHANGED SEVERELY.
>> Brown: THAT'S A FEAR WE
HEARD FROM EVERYONE HERE
INCLUDING MANDOLIN PLAYER CASEY
GROVES WHO'D ORGANIZED A FUND TO
HELP MUSICIANS AFTER THE FLOOD.
>> I THINK THAT'S THE BIGGEST
CONCERN MORE THAN WHERE THE
ROADS ARE GOING TO GO, WHO'S
GOING TO GET THE NEW SIDEWALK,
WHICH HOUSES STAY, WHICH GO.
I THINK THE BIGGEST CONCERN
REALLY IS THAT IT'S GOING TO
LOSE ITS CHARM, ITS SMALL-TOWN
FEEL.
I THINK A LOT OF THE ARTISTS AND
MUSICIAN COMMUNITY FEEL THEY
MIGHT BE PRICED OUT OF LIVING
HERE.
>> Brown: A LOT OF PEOPLE CAME
HERE FOR THAT IN THE FIRST
PLACE.
>> YES, AND NOW THE RENTALS ARE
HARDER TO FIND, AND TO BUY A
PLACE IS A STRUGGLE.
>> Brown: THIS WEEKEND,
THOUGH, THE FOCUS WAS ON THE
STRENGTH AND VIBRANCY OF THE
COMMUNITY, ESPECIALLY THROUGH
ITS MUSIC.
ROCKY GRASS FESTIVAL LIVES ON
AND  , SO TOO, SANG WATER
GIRLS, DOES LYONS.
AND YOU JUST WATCH US STAND
OUR GROUND
BUT YOU CAN'T TAKE OUR TOWN
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THE U.S. AND U.N. ANNOUNCED
ISRAEL AND HAMAS HAVE AGREED TO
A 72-HOUR CEASE-FIRE, STARTING
TOMORROW.
S
EXPLAINED THE NEXT STEPS.
>> DURING THIS PERIOD, CIVILIANS
IN GAZA WILL RECEIVE URGENTLY
NEEDED HUMANITARIAN RELIEF AND
THE OPPORTUNITY TO CARRY OUT
VITAL FUNCTIONS INCLUDING
BURYING THE DEAD, TAKING CARE OF
THE INJURED AND RESTOCKING FOOD
SUPPLIES.
ISRAELIAN AND PALESTINIAN
DELEGATIONS WILL IMMEDIATELY GO
TO CAIRO FOR NEGOTIATIONS WITH
THE GOVERNMENT OF EGYPT AT THE
INVITATION OF EGYPT AIMED AT
REACHING A DURABLE CEASE FIRE.
THE U.S. WILL SEND A SMALL
DELAGATION.
STOCKS ON WALL STREET PLUNGED IN
THEIR WORST ONE-DAY DROP SINCE
FEBRUARY.
NEARLY ALL OF THE MONTH'S GAINS
WHERE ERASED.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE RIGHT NOW, THE FIVE-YEAR-
OLD CANCER SURVIVOR WHO MADE
HEADLINES LAST YEAR AS SAN
FRANCISCO'S CAPED CRUSADOR IS
BACK AND HE'S STRONGER THAN
EVER.
BATKID WILL MAKE HIS FILM DEBUT
IN AN UPCOMING DOCUMENTARY.
WE SPOKE TO HIS MOM, NATALIE
SCOTT, WHO GIVES US AN UPDATE,
READ THAT ON OUR RUNDOWN.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, WE'LL REPORT ON THE
CALIFORNIA FARMERS DIGGING DEEP
TO COMBAT A HISTORIC DROUGHT BY
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.